---
title: <Dominique Chen> (<2022>) — <Work>
date: 2025-06-25
tags:
  - reading
  - affective-geography
  - more-than-human
  - care
draft: true
summary: |
  1-line statement of the author’s main argument.
link: https://doi.org/...
---

> *Direct quote that captures the essence.*


## Insights
### Care

The concept of _care_—a continuous _unobligated obligation_ to look after and maintain a healthy state that will otherwise deteriorate—is key to the design of AI technology. Because only in the repetitive, active action of care, people can _become one with_ the receiver of the care—the receiver's wellbeing directly relates to _my_ wellbeing (physical or mental). Importantly, the receiver can be mortal or immortal, or even something extending beyond our cognition. Humans are innately malleable to project our sense of wellbeing into a different kind.[^1] Think about a piece of furniture that you sometimes wax and appreciate—Its well-maintained status becomes part of your happiness. Maria Puig de la Bellacasa studied the care for the soil,[^2] a _food web_ that's so vastly interconnected with innumerous factors that we can only perceive a fraction of the aspects that we can care about, hoping it will work, but always continuing to discover the other factors at play. The care of such a complex matter is, undeniably, a slow, full of trial and errors, not lacking sweat and tears, yet immensely rewarding process.

## #needs-review Unobligated obligation

The concept is especially important in overcoming the obligation set by _the third party, or the transcendent entity_ (a recurring concept of Osawa Masachi). [^3] Since that kind of obligation creates a sense of distance in our interaction with the other. Caring, in this sense, is an innate need to interact and take the responsibility for the other, not forced upon by any third entity. 

## Breaking down care: Ethopoietic process

| Ethopoietic process    | Key action that can be designed |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| Daily maintenance      | Noticing                        |
| Emotional attachment   | Acting-on                       |
| Unobligated obligation | Co-presencing                   |
- In the phase after emotional attachment, there's a diminution of a sense of forced obligation and associated efforts, and the caring process is more likely to continue.
- Dirty, sweaty interaction might be just part of the deal. Think about caring for a patient, an animal, or a city street, it's impossible to neglect the importance of removing, cleaning up the waste so that the remaining part is healthy and well-maintained.
- Care is a two-way street, the carer also receives a sense of empowerment from the receiver. Biologically it may be explained in terms of an elevation of oxytocin. 

### Lessons from growing grapes

> Growing AI = Growing fruit?




## Actions

### How we can design #needs-review "care time"?

Care time is a concept proposed by Bellacasa—time manifested through daily, practical, repetitive action of care. It's the opposite of efficiency. Even if some parts can be automated, the remaining you can never automate—otherwise the entire concept of care disappears with the automation—the core of care.



[^1]: I'm building my hypothesis on Bellacasa, works done by science-technology-sociology (STS) researchers, affective geologists such as Kryzywoszynska's participatory research,[^4] and Jamie Lorimer's advocation for probiotic environmentalities, and further extended the concept to immortal things. Caring other humans, other species are more than ever relatable (in an aging, environmentally-sensitive society especially), but there are plenty of concrete cases and experiences that suggest human beings can project affection to objects and materials, not to say robots and AI agents. It's especially well-observed in Japan, nowadays in the form of affective robots and agents. One of the reasons roots in a religious and cultural concept that deifies (almost) everything surrounding us, as in Yaoyorozunokami (八百万の神), where people feel a sense of spirit and affection towards nature, like animals, trees, forests, and river, but also things like garments, needles, or china. Although Japanese case exemplifies this hypothesis to an exceptionally elevated level, the same sense is shared across different cultures to some extent.

[^2]: Maria Puig de la Bellacasa, Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More than Human Worlds, University of Minnesota Press, 2017; "'Nothing comes without its world': Thinking with care," The Sociological Review, No. 60, 2012, p.198

[^3]: #needs-review Osawa Masachi

[^4]: Anna Krzywoszynska, "Empowerment as skill: The role of affect in building new subjectivities," in Michelle Bastian, Yonf ah Seong, Hiraku Ogura, Kiichi Moriya, Yuto Mitani, and Naoto Sekiya (eds.), Participatory Research in More-than-Human[^5] Worlds, Routledge, 2016.

[^5]: David Abram, The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-Than-Human Worl, Pantheon, 1996
